Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami’s
Sri Vraja-vilasa-stava
Prayers Glorifying the Lord’s Pastimes in Vraja
TEXT 1
The highwaymen lust, greed and anger have captured me and bound me with the 
ropes of the desire for fame. I pray that the heroic devotees of Lord Krishna, 
the enemy of the Agha demon, may defeat my captors and cut the ropes that bind 
me.
TEXT 2
I am scorched by the blazing forest fire of old age, deeply bitten by the 
poisonous snake of blindness, pierced by the sharp arrows of forced dependence 
on others, and surrounded by the lions of anger, lust, and greed. O Lord 
Krishna, please give me the nectarean potion of pure love for You, which will 
make me strong and heroic enough to resist all the enemies and engage in Your 
devotional service without deviation.
TEXT 3
By tasting a single drop of the memory of the transcendental nectar ocean of the 
sweetness of the divine couple my heart has become restless. I bow down before 
the land and people of Vraja. I yearn to see my two masters. 
TEXT 4 
The disembodied demigod cupid, who attained a body by continually tasting the 
nectar of the sight of the divine couple, eternally illuminates this entire land 
of Vraja, with a jubilant festival of Lord Krsna’s transcendental amorous 
pastimes. When shall I lovingly gaze on Sri Sri Gandharva-Giridhari (Sri Sri 
Radha-Krsna), the crowning garlands of all charming couples.
TEXT 5
The city of Dvaraka, where the brother and sons of the Lord reside, and where 
the lord enjoys transcendental pastimes with a great multitude of queens, each 
eclipsing many hundreds of goddesses of fortune, is dearer even than Vaikuntha. 
Because it is the place of Lord Krsna’s birth, Mathura, the abode of 
transcendental love, is even more dear than Dvaraka. Within the district of 
Mathura , the land of Sri Vraja is splendidly manifest. I eternally worship the 
land of Mathura.
TEXT 6
Even today affectionate Lord Krsna enjoys the very sweet nectar of 
transcendental pastimes there, herding the cows with His brother and His many 
dear friends. A wonderful sweetness becomes manifest in the heart of they who 
understand the nectar of this place. Of Vraja, which is more dear even than the 
city of Mathura, I take shelter.
 
TEXT 7
Surrounded by their witty gopi friends, the youthful divine couple enjoys many 
kinds of transcendental pastimes within the groves and mountain caves and among 
the blossoming vines of Vrndavana forest. I worship Vrndavana forest, which is 
delightful with the scent of their lotus feet.
TEXT 8
In Vrndavana is the town of Nandisvara, where the goddess of fortune always 
walks, where the great mystic perfections are eternally present, where the cows 
are protected, where the people of Vraja live, and where Lord Krsna happily 
enjoys transcendental pastimes of under the loving protection of His parents. I 
worship this town of Nandisvara, the home of the king of Vraja and the most 
important of the land of Vraja.
TEXT 9 
To celebrate his son’s birth, the King of Gokula respectively gave in charity to 
the brahmanas palatable foods, nectar beverages, and transcendental cows 
decorated with many jewels. Day after day he satisfied the brahmanas with these 
valuable presentations, and he repeatedly begged for their blessings on his 
infant boy. I worship the king of Gokula, who is always absorbed in thoughts of 
his son.
TEXT 10
May the queen of Vraja, whose breasts continually trickle milk out of maternal 
love for her son, who is prepared to give her life many millions of times to 
protect him from even a single drop of perspiration, and who is so attached to 
Him that if she cannot for a moment see Him she cries like a cow frightened for 
her new born calf, protect us.
TEXT 11
Because of her own son Balarama’s intimate friendship with Him, Rohini-devi 
showers her love upon Lord Krsna. She is an expert cook and she delights the 
king and queen of Vraja with her sincere friendship and saintly qualities.
TEXT 12
The splendour of Lord Balarama’s transcendental form eclipses many millions of 
glistening rising moons, and the slightest scent of His boundless strength is 
sufficient to destroy many armies of demons. Although He knows the supernatural 
power of his younger brother, Krsna, still, out of love for Him, He never leaves 
Him alone in the forest for even a moment. I offer my prayers to Lord Balarama, 
the enemy of Dhenukasura.
TEXT 13
Speaking with a voice that seems to mock the roaring of hundreds of thousands of 
thunderclouds, Parjanya Maharaja expresses his pride in having such a wonderful 
grandson. I offer my respectful obeisances to Parjanya, Krsna’s grandfather, who 
is expert at delighting his grandson by speaking into His ear many joking words.
TEXT 14
I offer my respectful obeisances to Variyasi-devi, Krsna’s grandmother. With 
merry joking words she worships Krsna, calling Him the moon of grandsons. Happy 
and proud of her grandson her feet no longer touch the ground when she walks.
TEXT 15
His face handsome with a great white beard, and his complexion dark, pious 
Upananda is the respected prime minister in the council chambers of the King of 
Vraja. Considering Him millions of times more dear than his own life, Upananda 
delights his nephew Krsna. I pray that Upananda may always stay in the 
government council and protect the land of Vraja.
TEXT 16
Nanda Maharaj’s younger brother Sannanda is very gentle, affectionate and 
generous. His complexion is fair and his beard black. He is very devoted to his 
elder brother and he is the father of Sunanda-gopi. He pleases Krsna by giving 
Him palatable dishes made with buffalo yoghurt. He worships Krsna with every 
breath. May Lord Krsna’s uncle Sannanda, the master of a great herd of buffalo, 
always protect us.
TEXT 17
Upananda’s son Subhadra is dark complexioned, youthful, handsome, and 
intelligent. He is the best of astrologers. With his vast scholarship he has 
defeated even Brhaspati. He stays at the left hand of the king of Vraja. With 
good advice he protects Lord Krsna, who is millions of times more dear to him 
than his own life. With great pleasure let us glorify, offer our respectful 
obeisances to Subhadra.
TEXT 18
Frightened that delicate Krsna may be hurt by the demons, Ambika performed 
severe austerities for many days to please the goddess Durga, who granted her a 
boon that her son Vijaya would become a powerful hero able to kill many demons. 
May Ambika, Lord Krsna’s nurse, protect us.
TEXT 19
Saying “Where are the demons? With ease I shall shorten their lives,” Vijaya 
calls so loudly his words are heard in millions of spiritual universes. Out of 
maternal affection for Krsna, Ambika instructed her son Vijaya to always stay 
near child Krsna and protect Him from the demons. I worship Vijaya, the son of 
Krsna’s nurse.
TEXT 20
Bhaguri Muni, the learned chief priest of Vraja-pura, is the personification of 
all the Vedas. Everyday He chants mantras for the protection of each of Krsna’s 
limbs. Everyday he smells Krsna’s head. Everyday he offers Krsna many 
benedictions. I bow down and offer my respectful obeisances to Bhaguri Muni, the 
best of the sages.
TEXT 21
Sridama is the most expert and clever of the cowherd boys, and he is the abode 
of intense love for Lord Krsna. His complexion is dark, and he is proud that his 
qualities, age, clothing and handsome features closely resemble that of Lord 
Krsna. If for a single moment he cannot see Lord Krsna, he trembles with 
anxiety. I completely take shelter of Sridama, the constant companion of Lord 
Krsna.
TEXT 22
Filled with deep love for him, and anxious that they may be separated, Subala 
never, even in dream, lets go of the hand of Sri Krsna, the moon of Gokula. 
Subala’s heart is sprinkled with the waters of the swiftly moving mountain 
stream of devotion to Srimati Radhika. I offer my respectful obeisances to 
Subala whose body trembles with love for Sri Sri Radha-Krsna.
TEXT 23
Assembling the surabhi cows in one place, hand in hand, Krsna’s friends play and 
joke. For them the ocean of pure love has washed away the mud of awe and 
reverence in Krsna’s presence. Let us take shelter of these boys, whose hearts, 
lives, and property are all placed at Lord Krsna’s feet.
TEXT 24
The personified mellows of comedy, pure-hearted, eternally hungry, jubilant, and 
splendid Madhumangala daily induces the laughter of his two friends (Sri Sri 
Radha-Krsna) with a host of comic speeches and gestures. With great devotion let 
us at once bow down to offer our respect to Madhumangala, the joking friend of 
Lord Krsna, the moon of Vrndavana.
TEXT 25
Accompanied by an expert gopi friend, Paurnamasi daily arranges the secret 
rendezvous of expert Sri Sri Radha and Krsna. I worship noble and auspicious 
Paurnamasi, who at every moment tastes the nectar happiness of seeing the 
pastimes of the divine couple.
TEXT 26
Noble, generous, learned, intelligent, fair complexion, fifty-year-old King 
Vrsabhanu wears a neatly clipped beard. He is the close friend of Nanda, the 
king of Vraja. To him, Sri Radha is even dearer than his eldest child Sridama. I 
constantly worship famous King Vrsabhanu.
TEXT 27
Her mind overwhelmed with a flood of love, Kirtida-devi daily sends her two 
unmarried daughters to diligently gather all news of Srimati Radharani’s recent 
activities. May Kirtida-devi, the mother of Srimati Radharani protect us all.
TEXT 28
Angrily placing many obstacles to stop Their amorous pastimes, Mukhara-devi only 
increases the transcendental happiness of her two young grandchildren, Sri Sri 
Radha and Krsna. I respectfully bow down before elderly Mukhara-devi, and I 
place her lotus feet upon my head. 
TEXT 29
Flooded with the nectar of intense love for her two friends (Sri Sri 
Radha-Krsna), who more dear to her than her own life, affectionately arrogant in 
their presence, and daily arranging their rendezvous, Lalita-devi expertly 
teaches her friend Radha the art of jealous anger. I pray Lalita-devi will one 
day accept me as one of her associates.
TEXT 30
Visakha-devi is the place where youthful divine couple enjoys affectionate and 
playful joking pastimes. Her sweet transcendental singing eclipses the voices of 
the cuckoos. I pray that Vishaka-devi may become pleased with me and accept me 
as her student.
TEXT 31
Filled with a great flood of love and decorating the ever-blossoming groves of 
Vrndavana with many fragrant flowers, Vrnda-devi creates a festive atmosphere 
for Sri Sri Radha-Krsna to enjoy transcendental pastimes with Their dear 
friends. Let me surrender to Vrnda-devi.
TEXT 32
Bringing Srimati Radharani to cook by the order of the queen of Vraja, and, as 
they both walked together on the path pleasing her by affectionately and 
continually narrating the latest news of Lord Krsna charming Kundalata-devi, 
glowing with friendship and auspicious playfulness became filled with happiness. 
I worship Kundalata-devi.
TEXT 33
Brought by the queen of Vraja to cook many palatable dishes of her own accord 
affectionate Dhanistha-devi, using many clever tricks, happily arranged for 
Srimati Radharani to meet her lover, Krsna, in the forest groves of Nandisvara 
Hill. I worship Dhanistha-devi, for whom her friend Radha is more dear than 
life.
TEXT 34
Her heart enchanted by repeatedly hearing the glories of the divine couple and 
longing to meet Them, Nandimukhi-devi left Avantipura and went to the land of 
Vraja, where she eternally increases the happiness of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna’s 
splendid and nectarean pastimes. I eternally offer my respectful obeisances to 
Nandimukhi-devi.
TEXT 35
Her waters filled with musk and saffron fallen from Sri Sri Radha-Krsna as they 
enjoy many nectar water-pastimes, the Jamuna river happily smiles at Them with 
her foam and splashes Them with the beautiful hands of her waves. I pray the 
Jamuna river may bring transcendental happiness to us.
TEXT 36
Moved by the appeal of supremely blissful Lord Krsna, the gopis spontaneously 
and angrily rebuke Srimati Radharani, who is more dear to them than their own 
life’s breath and encourage her to again enjoy the pastimes with Krsna. Bowing 
my head I take shelter of these dear friends of Srimati Radharani, who daily 
arranged for her to enjoy transcendental pastimes with Lord Krsna.
TEXT 37
With great love, enthusiasm, and respect, Krsna’s servants, who are much like 
his friends, serve Him in many ways and please Him by bringing the flute, vina, 
water, betel nuts, and other articles. I worship Krsna’s servants who have Patri 
as their leader.
TEXT 38
By offering her betel nuts, by massaging her feet, by bringing her water, by 
arranging for her meetings with Lord Krsna, and by performing many other 
services, many gopi maidservants affectionately please Sri Radha, the great 
queen of Vrndavana forest. When the Divine Couple enjoy Their pastimes, these 
maidservants are not at all shy, even in the presence of the great gopis for 
whom Sri Radha is more dear than life. I take shelter of these gopi 
maidservants, who have Srimati Rupa-manjari as their leader.
TEXT 39
Considering the expanded ocean of their own happiness to be as insignificant as 
a blade of grass and filled with pure love for Lord Krsna, the enemy of the Mura 
demon, the Lord’s personal associates strive to make him always happy. I worship 
these fortunate associates of Lord Krsna, the husband of the goddess of fortune.
TEXT 40
Let me worship the personal associates of Srimati Radharani. When Radharani 
becomes happy, they are pleased. If for a moment they cannot see Radharani, they 
become so distraught that they appear almost dead. They must have performed some 
pious activities in their previous births in order to obtain this auspicious 
condition where they love Srimati Radharani more than their own lives.
TEXT 41
In order to increase the splendid and nectarean jealous love of Srimati 
Radharani, who sometimes becomes proud of her own good fortune, Lord Krsna 
briefly enjoys pastimes with other gopis, who blossom with many amorous desires. 
Let us offer our respectful obeisances to these gopis, who must have performed 
many great pious activities in order to play this role in the Lord’s pastimes.
TEXT 42
Affectionately protected by Krsna, and their hearts rapt in meditation on the 
particles of dust falling from the tip of his handsome lotus toenails, the gopas 
experience a happiness greater than the happiness of many millions of universes. 
I worship these exalted gopas.
TEXT 43
Considering Him dearer than their own lives out of parental love, the elderly 
gopis worship even a drop of perspiration of Krsna’s lotus feet, and for a long 
time they kiss his head, decorated with handsome locks of hair. I worship the 
dust of these gopis’ feet. 
TEXT 44
The hooves of Sri Krsna’s surabhi cows are decorate with sapphires, their horns 
are studded with gold, and their white cheeks have crippled the pride of the 
snow-capped mountain peaks. I pray these surabhi cows may protect us.
TEXT 45
In the company of Balarama and His other friends, and His own body splendidly 
covered with the dust raised by their hooves, the prince of Vraja daily enjoys a 
great festival of protecting and milking the cows. With great happiness He 
eagerly enjoys pastimes with them in the great forests and on the grand hills 
and river banks of Vraja. Let me worship these surabhi cows.
TEXT 46
All glories to Lord Krsna’s pet bull Padmagandha, whose handsome horns are 
covered with gold and studded with jewels, whose hooves are splendidly decorated 
with sapphires, and whose splendid neck is decorated with a swinging garland of 
reddish flowers. 
TEXT 47
Sometimes Lord Krsna feeds the calves earnestly placing small bunches of tender 
fresh grass in their mouths, and sometimes He very carefully massages their 
limbs. I yearn to one day see these calves of Lord Krsna jumping and frolicking 
in Vrndavana.
TEXT 48
The fortunate flute deeply drinks the nectar of Lord Krsna’s lips day and night. 
I offer my respectful obeisances to this flute, which, with it’s transcendental 
music, weakens the pride of Srimati Radhika. 
TEXT 49
Neither the flattering cajoling words spoken by Krsna’s gopi messengers nor the 
many hints, allegorises, and joking instructions spoken by Krsna’s cowherd 
friends nor Krsna’s personally falling at her feet and begging Hr to forgive Him 
nor even the harsh criticisms spoken by her intimate friends who are able to 
rout the proud jealous anger residing in Srimati Radha’s heart. Only Lord 
Krsna’s flute, disdaining all previous useless attempts, was able to very easily 
chase away that jealous anger. Let us glorify Lord Krsna’s exalted and powerful 
friend, His flute.
TEXT 50
Pleased by the music of Lord Krsna’s flute, the best of the peacocks perform a 
great festival of dancing in the forest by the shore of a lake. Gracefully 
moving he delights enjoying transcendental pastimes in the forest. Meditating on 
this, we ardently yearn to see that dancing king of the peacocks.
TEXT 51
Full of love for the residents of Vraja, and eager to protect Him, Lord Krsna 
respectfully lifted Govardhana Hill for seven days with His graceful hand. The 
caves of Govardhana Hill are splendidly decorated with kunkuma particles left 
when Sri Sri Radha-Krsna enjoyed transcendental pastimes. May Govardhana Hill, 
which is studded with many beautiful jewels, protect you all. 
TEXT 52
Filled with many champaka trees, beautiful young asoka trees, mango trees, 
kesanagara trees, bakula trees, lavanga creepers, and madhavi creepers, the area 
around Radha-kunda and Syama-kunda is very beautiful and pleasing to the heart, 
and it is the favourite pastime place of Sri Sri Radha-Krsna. Let me take 
shelter of these two lakes : Radha-kunda and Syama-kunda.
TEXT 53
The delightful forest of Vrndavana, beautiful Govardhana Hill and the nectarean 
area of the rasa dance, what to speak of other places are not equal to even a 
single particle of Radha-kunda and Syama-kunda. Let me take shelter of these two 
lakes, which are more dear to Lord Krsna than His own life’s breath.
TEXT 54
By the shore of Radha-kunda is a grand pavilion made of gold, pearls and 
precious gems. In that pavilion, Sri Sri Radha and Krsna, considering everything 
else unimportant, enjoy transcendental pastimes as the two prime ministers of 
the deity of transcendental love, and They happily anoint that kingdom of love 
with the sandal paste of Their pastimes. I eternally worship the splendid grove 
by the shore of Radha-kunda.
TEXT 55
The divine couple is splendidly reflected on the shore of the lake of each 
other’s heart. They are necklaces lovingly worn by each other. The creator 
Brahma has blessed Them with all good fortune. They are the resting place of all 
good opulences in the three worlds. When will I be able to directly worship the 
fair and dark divine couple.
TEXT 56
With restless sidelong glances, with movements of Their shoulders, with the 
nectar of gentle smiles, with kissing each other’s nectar lips, and with firm 
embraces, the youthful divine couple affectionately fulfils each other’s 
transcendental desires. Let us offer our respectful obeisances to Them, the two 
splendid monarchs of ujjvala-rasa.
TEXT 57
In Their eyes is great length, in the corners of Their eyes crookedness, in 
Their chest and breasts largeness, in Their gentle word charming crookedness, in 
Their hips broadness, and in all Their limbs extraordinary sweetness. I 
eternally worship the eternal splendour of Sri Sri Radha-Krsna.
TEXT 58
When the demon Arista was slain, a great lake named Arista-kunda, filled with 
nectar and surrounded with staircases, sprang from Lord Krsna’s lotus foot. 
Because it is the favourite of Sri Radha, this name embraces the name 
Radha-kunda. I eternally worship Radha-kunda.
TEXT 59
On the pretext of going to fetch clear water the lotus-eyed gopis again and 
again meet Lord Krsna with great happiness and love at Pavana-sarovara lake, 
which is filled with many kadamba trees and the pleasant humming sounds of many 
bees. May Pavana-sarovara lake protect us.
TEXT 60
Going to the shore of a certain lake, Parjanya Maharaja, who was to become 
Krsna’s grandfather, fasted, performed austerities, and worshipped Lord Narayana 
in order to attain a worthy grandson. Partly for this reason Sri Krsna, who is 
the reservoir of all transcendental virtues and the lifter of Govardhana Hill, 
appeared as the son of Nanda, the king of Vraja, and the grandson of Parjanya 
Maharaja. The place where Parjanya Maharaja fasted is famous in this world as 
Ksunnahara-sarovara (the lake of fasting). I pray that I may take shelter of 
this sacred place.
TEXT 61
Ordered by Brahma, who spoke from the sky, Paurnamasi-devi crowned Srimati 
Radharani queen of the beautiful forest of Vrndavana, by jubilantly sprinkling 
the waters of the Manasa-ganga and other sacred rivers upon Her head in the 
company of Savitri-devi and other delighted demigoddesses. I pray that sacred 
place, known as Unmatta-radhasthali (the place where Srimati Radharani became 
overwhelmed with happiness) may sprinkle some transcendental happiness on me.
TEXT 62
Joking and playing, Lord Krsna enjoyed many pastimes with His friends in a small 
stone pavilion built by expert architects on Nandisvara Hill. Let me take 
shelter of that pavilion, which is anointed with the transcendental fragrance of 
Lord Krsna’s feet.
TEXT 63
As he was dancing with the intelligent, graceful, and splendidly beautiful 
gopis, Sri Krsna suddenly left their company and went with Srimati Radharani to 
a secluded place and lovingly decorated Her with many flower ornaments. The 
sweetness of this place astonishes the residents of all the three worlds. I pray 
that this sacred place, where Lord Krsna performed the rasa dance, may give me 
shelter.
TEXT 64
The Manasa-ganga River flows so swiftly on the side of Govardhana Hill that it’s 
waves push the splendid rocks lining it’s shores. I pray the Manasa-ganga River, 
where Sri Sri Gandharvika-Muravimardana (Sri Sri Radha-Krsna) enjoy jubilant 
boating pastimes, may give me shelter.
TEXT 65
All of Them decorated with the colourful mineral pigments found there, Lord 
Krsna and His affectionate friends enjoy pastimes in the hills of Vraja with a 
great festival of joking words. In the caves of those same hills, Lord Krsna 
also enjoys many pastimes with Srimati Radharani. Let me worship these, the best 
of all hills.
TEXT 66
While tending the cows in the summer season, Sri Krsna, the transcendental son 
of the king of the gopas , jubilantly enjoys water sports. Both sides eager for 
victory, He affectionately sprinkles His charming friends in the broad lakes and 
streams of Vraja. I eternally worship these transcendental lakes and streams.
TEXT 67
Hearing the sound of Srimati Radharani and Krsna brilliantly playing duets on 
the vina and flute, the leaders of the deer community become stunned with 
transcendental happiness and stand still the grass they were formerly chewing 
now half-falling from their mouths. I pray that those deer who are full of love 
for the divine couple, may grant transcendental happiness to me.
TEXT 68
Their hearts pleased by the rising waves of madhura-rasa, the youthful divine 
couple enjoys transcendental pastimes in the beautiful groves of Vraja, aromatic 
with many pleasant flowers and filled with many humming bees. Let us sweep these 
forest groves with our long hair.
TEXT 69
In the very cool and pleasant shade of the trees, on a throne glistening with 
fallen pollen and served by splendid bees carrying drops of honey, the youthful 
divine couple enjoy transcendental pastimes. I pray these trees may always 
protect me.
TEXT 70
As They pick flowers, the gently smiling lovers, Sri Sri Gandharva-Muravairi 
(Sri Sri Radha-Krsna), playfully quarrel. Seeing these eternally new and fresh 
transcendental pastimes, Their gopi friends begin to smile, and the creepers of 
Vraja, on the pretext of pushing forth new blossoms, also smile and laugh. May I 
serve these transcendental creepers with great love and devotion.
TEXT 71
Plunged into the nectar mellows of pure devotion, with very sweet singing the 
birds delight the nearby youthful couple in the land of Vraja. I pray that these 
birds, so dear to the divine couple, may delight me with their glance.
TEXT 72
By softly buzzing and gracefully wandering among the mango, kadamba, bakula, and 
other trees, as well as through the madhavis and other flowering vines, the 
bumblebees of Vraja delight the divine couple. Let us offer our respectful 
obeisances to these bees.
TEXT 73
Blossoming with happiness, the forest king Krsna became completely captivated by 
the sidelong glances of the forest-queen Srimati Radharani, who was also 
blossoming with happiness as He decorated Her with many blossoming flowers from 
the king of kadamba trees. I pray that supremely opulent king of kadamba trees 
may appear before me and grant transcendental happiness to my eyes.
TEXT 74
Humbled by great fear, Indra, the king of the demigods, grasped Lord Krsna’s 
lotus feet and, accompanied by a surabhi cow, performed the coronation festival 
of bathing them with the water of the celestial Ganges. In this way Lord Krsna’s 
kingship over the cows became splendidly manifest. I pray that Govinda-kunda, 
the lake created by that ceremonial bath, may eternally appear before my eyes.
TEXT 75
When Vraja’s king offered a great quantity of foodstuff to Govardhana Hill, 
Krsna, the enemy of Aghasura, assumed a gigantic form, proclaimed that He was 
actually Govardhana Hill, invited everyone to ask boons from Him, and, fooling 
even Srimati Radharani, ate all the offered food. Let me take shelter of the 
anna-kuta festival, when Lord Krsna enjoyed these pastimes.
 
TEXT 76
Charming and handsome Lord Krsna enjoys transcendental pastimes on the summit of 
Govardhana Hill, the king of mountains. There He splendidly manifest, eternally 
enjoying the pleasures of a transcendental king. With great love and devotion I 
worship Govardhana Hill, where Lord Krsna enjoys transcendental pastimes.
TEXT 77
One day Lord Krsna, the youthful king of amorous heroes, became eager at heart 
to enjoy the dana-keli pastime. Blocking the path, He forbade Srimati Radharani 
to pass, proclaimed Himself a toll collector appointed by the king of love, and 
demanded that she pay a toll of the milk products She was carrying. I sing the 
glories of Sri Krsna-vedi, the place where the Lord enjoyed these pastimes.
TEXT 78
Because Sri Krsna enjoyed the dana-keli pastime in a secluded place by the shore 
of this lake, it has become known as Dana-sarovara. The truth of this hill 
remains hidden to persons averse to the mellows of pure devotional service. Only 
the devotees have the power to understand it. I pray that I may reside at 
Dana-sarovara, the place where Lord Krsna enjoyed the dana-keli pastime.
TEXT 79
Sri-sarovara, Brahma-sarovara, Kadambakhanda-sarovara, Sumanah-sarovara, 
Rudra-sarovara, Apsarah-sarovara, Gaurika-sarovara, Jyotsnamoksana-sarovara, 
Malyahara-sarovara, Vibudhari-sarovara, Indradhvaja-sarovara, and many other 
beautiful lakes are splendidly manifested as so many beautiful jewels in a 
circle around divine Govardhana Hill. Let me glorify these transcendental lakes.
TEXT 80
During the spring season the gopis move Sri Sri Gandharva-Giridhari (Sri Sri 
Radha-Krsna) on a swing. The faces of the divine couple blossom with happiness 
by tasting the nectar of these swing pastimes. I worship Govinda-sthala, the 
famous place where the divine couple enjoys these pastimes.
TEXT 81
When the Kaliya serpent offended His friends for whom he is more dear than life, 
Lord Krsna punished him, dancing on him and kicking him with the soles of His 
feet. I worship Kaliya-hrada, the lake where Lord Krsna performed these 
pastimes.
TEXT 82
Once, accompanied by the gopas, gopis, and lowing surabhi cows, the supremely 
opulent, noble, and magnanimous Lord Krsna felt very uncomfortable in the winter 
cold. Twelve suns then appeared at that place, and with great devotion warmed 
the Lord with their intense shining. I eternally take shelter of this sacred 
place, which bears the name Dvadasasurya-tirtha (the place of the twelve suns).
TEXT 83
When the twelve sums shone from every direction, perspiration fell from Lord 
Krsna’s transcendental body, and from this perspiration came a charming, 
splendid, clear lake bearing the sweet fragrance of the Lord’s delicate, 
supremely handsome, and supremely opulent transcendental limbs. Bowing down, I 
worship this lake, known as Praskandahana-sarovara.
TEXT 84
Entering the clear waters of the Yamuna to prepare for the incomparable worship 
of goddess Katyayani, the girls of Vraja left their garments on the shore. 
Smiling and clever Krsna stole those garments, climbed a kadamba tree, 
embarrassed the girls by speaking many splendid joking words, and eventually 
returned the garments. I take shelter of Ciraghatta, where the Lord enjoyed 
these pastimes.
TEXT 85
With his mad neighing, Kesi made the three worlds tremble, and with the wild 
rolling of his eyes he set the entire universe on flames. Krsna killed this 
demon as easily as one splits a blade of grass and then washed the blood from 
His hands at a place now known as Kesi-tirtha. I worship that sacred place.
TEXT 86
The beautiful, wealthy and learned wives of the yajnika-brahmanas voluntarily, 
happily and devoted fed Krsna, Balarama, and all their affectionate friends many 
varieties of the four kinds of foodstuff, each dish rebuking the taste of 
nectar. We bow down to offer our respects to the place where Lord Krsna enjoyed 
this pastime.
TEXT 87
Desiring to quickly attain the treasure of the embraces of Lord Krsna, the 
splendid and affectionate gopis devotedly and happily worshipped Lord Siva on 
the bank of the Jamuna. I daily worship Gopisvara-tirtha, where the gopis 
performed their worship.
TEXT 88
Seeing Her father worship Suryadeva out of far of the nearby Kamsa, Srimati 
Radharani, in the secluded place known as Santanupada, also earnestly worshipped 
Suryadeva to attain a certain youth, whose complexion is as dark as a host of 
monsoon clouds, as Her chosen husband. I pray that Suryadeva may protect us.
TEXT 89
During the great festival of Lord Krsna’s birth, the king of Vraja respectfully 
gave to the brahmanas a mountain of glittering jewel ornaments, an even greater 
mountain of grains, and 200,000 young cows, all beautifully decorated with gold 
and necklaces of large pearls. I offer my respectful obeisances to Mahavana, the 
place where the king gave his charity.
TEXT 90
In the city of Mukhyeravali the precious jewel known as Srimati Radharani took 
birth in the mine of Kirtida-devi’s womb, which is glorified by jubilant 
demigods, sages and human beings. I pray that when I enter King Vrshabhanu’s 
capitol city of Mukhyeravali-pura, populated with many gopas, gopis, and surabhi 
cows, I may become drowned in great flood of transcendental bliss and love.
TEXT 91
Although for Her own happiness She yearns to place Lord Krsna’s handsome and 
delicate lotus feet on her breasts, Srimati Radharani is reluctant to do so, 
fearing that, even though Her body is very delicate, her breasts are very hard. 
I pray that Lord Krsna, who also places his lotus feet on the hood of Ananta 
Sesa, will permit me to reside in His land of Vraja.
TEXT 92
Let me worship the forest of Kamyavana. It is very dear to Sri Sri Radha-Krsna, 
and it contains the Kama-sarovara lake, where the gopis enjoy many 
transcendental pastimes.
TEXT 93
In the forest of Bandiravana, my beautiful queen, proud Sri Radha, started a 
wrestling competition among Her closest friends. When She eagerly wrestled with 
Lord Krsna, She brought great happiness to the god of love. Let me worship that 
forest of Bandiravana.
TEXT 94
When the Yamuna river would not come according to His order, angry Lord Balarama 
began to drag it toward the ocean with the edge of His plough. I devotedly offer 
my respects to the wonderful Rama-ghatta, where even today all men may see the 
marks where Balarama began to drag the Yamuna.
TEXT 95
Seeing His friends, for whom He is more dear than life, enter the sinful 
Aghasura’s belly, which burned with a great forest fire of the most violent 
poison, Lord Krsna also entered the demon, killed it, and rescued His friends. I 
pray that Sarpasthali, the place where the Lord enjoyed these pastimes, may 
protect me.
TEXT 96
When, eager to see his master’s glory, the creator Brahma stole the cowherd boys 
and calves, Lord Krsna pleased the mothers of the boys and calves by assuming 
the forms of their sons. I worship Vatsaharasthali, where the Lord enjoyed this 
pastime.
TEXT 97
Afraid that he had committed a grave offence by stealing the cowherd boys and 
calves, Brahma fell down on the ground, and, with tears in his eyes, spoke many 
wonderful and unprecedented prayers glorifying gently smiling Lord Krsna, who is 
both the giver of liberation and the wonderful cowherd son of the king of Vraja. 
Let us glorify this sacred place, Sesabhirucaturmukha, where frightened Brahma 
offered prayers to the Lord.
TEXT 98
Filled with many large lakes, hills, and rivers, with many desire trees and 
desire creepers, and with many flowers invaded by a great army of bumblebees 
intoxicated by the sweet aroma, the twelve forests of Vrndavana are splendidly 
beautiful. I bow down to offer my respects at every moment to these twelve 
forests, which are very dear to Lord Krsna.
TEXT 99
Leaving behind Lord Krsna’s lotus feet, which are millions of times more dear to 
him than his own life’s breath, Uddhava, eternally filled with the nectar of 
pure devotional love, happily stayed in Vraja for ten months. Moment by moment 
he brought the residents of Vraja back to life by describing Lord Krsna’s 
pastimes. He said to them, “Look! Krsna has returned!” I carry Uddhava’s feet 
upon my head.
TEXT 100
With great humbleness let me offer my respectful obeisances to the supremely 
pious dear devotees of the Lord who reside in Vraja. Even though Brahma is a 
great demigod entrusted with many weighty duties, he sincerely yearns to take 
birth among the bushes and blades of grass in Vraja.
TEXT 101
Because of having previously worshipped the beautiful lotus feet of Sri Sri 
Gandharva-Acyuta (Sri Sri Radha-Krsna) with the eternally fresh sweetness of 
pure transcendental love, some great souls are able to reside on the shore of 
Queen Radha’s favourite lake (Radha-kunda). These great devotees are my life and 
soul.
TEXT 102
The grass, bushes, insects, and other creatures in Vraja are all very dear to 
Lord Krsna. They assist the Lord in His pastimes. They are full of 
transcendental bliss. Again and again the scriptures recount the earnest request 
of Brahma and others to reside in Vraja. For these reasons I bow to offer my 
respects to all the creatures who reside in Vraja.
TEXT 103
When, aimlessly wandering around Govardhana Hill, madly calling out “O Radha! O 
Krsna!” again and again, and stumbling as I walk, will I sprinkle the places of 
the Lord’s pastimes with tears from my eyes?
TEXT 104
Neither Brahma, Narada, Siva, or the great devotees with pure love of Krsna are 
able to properly or completely understand the sweetness of the land of Vraja. 
Only Lord Balarama and His mother Rohini, who are both filled with 
transcendental love, are able to understand the land of Vraja. How is it 
possible to describe the land of Vraja?
TEXT 105
Even if I have the opportunity to bathe in the nectarean ocean of pure love of 
Krsna, and even if I have the pure devotees of the infallible Supreme 
Personality of Godhead as my associates, I will not consent to live, even for a 
single moment, in any sacred place other than Vrajabhumi. Even if the residents 
of Vraja appear to be ordinary, and even if they fill my ears with useless 
gossip, I pray that I may remain among them, eternally residing here in Vraja.
TEXT 106
The two feet of Srimati Rupa-manjari, who is full of love for Lord Krsna, and 
who expertly worships Srimati Radharani, are the only goal of my life.
TEXT 107
These verses, which bear the title Vraja-vilasa-stava, are very graceful and 
beautiful, filled with the splendid and charming sweetness of the residents of 
Vraja. They who regularly read these verses with great respect and greedy 
enthusiasm will be able to directly see the divine couple surrounded by Their 
associates in this land of Vraja.